# dots-nix

These are my NixOS dotfiles. The repo follows the dendritic pattern, with all files being flake-parts modules.

The flake.nix file is managed by [flake-file](https://github.com/denful/flake-file), and is autogenerated from over [here](./modules/nix/dendritic.nix).

## Repo structure

Outline of the different folders in the repo, their format and purpose:

<details>
<summary>modules/</summary>

### `modules/`

All nix code lives here. Files are imported recursively via [import-tree](https://github.com/denful/import-tree).

Each file is a flake-parts module, with the majority being [flake-aspects](https://github.com/denful/flake-aspects) as well.

### `modules/features`

These are all aspects, which bundle a NixOS and/or home-manager module.
Features represent a self-contained functionality, typically a piece of software (eg. firefox), and the configurations it needs.
Features are most commonly loaded by archetypes, but system aspects can load them as well.

### `modules/archetypes`

Semantic groupings for machine types, such as `laptop`, `workstation`, `base`.

Archetypes should not declare or package software themselves unless only used by that specific archetype, most commonly they should include aspects from `modules/features`.
Some exceptions would be laptops setting laptop-specific settings, such as battery control.

### `modules/hosts`

Individual host configurations, a single host aspect maps to a physical machine with NixOS (and possibly home-manager) installed.
These are the top-level module entrypoint for constructing a `nixosConfiguration` or `homeConfiguration`.
Typically include a single archetype, along with machine-specific features if not provided by the archetype.

### `modules/system`

More lower-level configuration required for a system to operate. Eg. networking, bootloader, system services.
Features should not depend on these aspects, and typically an archetype would declare what system aspects it wants.

### `modules/hardware`

Some similarity with `modules/system`, but is only concerned with hardware-related configurations.
Archetypes may include these (such as bluetooth on a laptop), but host aspects are also free to include these when needed.

### `modules/nix`

Mostly internal nix helpers and scaffolding, such as `mkNixos` and `mkHomeManager` utilities.
Owns the inputs for `flake-parts`, `flake-file`, `flake-aspects` and `import-tree`, and sets up the required flake-parts modules and supported systems.
Also ensures `nixpkgs` and `home-manager` are in inputs, since they are vital for the configurations to work.

Does not provide NixOS or homeManager modules (with the exception of treefmt as of now).

### `modules/constants`

Provides a flake-wide context module, which can be accessed as `inputs.self.context` from any flake-parts module.
Used to propagate some static constants such as the home directory and admin username to any nixos or home-manager module that would want it.

### `modules/secrets`

Defines nixos modules for sops, with the proper settings to include specific secrets from [secrets/](./secrets) onto a system when included.
Does not house any secret content it self, only the definitions on how and from where secrets should be included.

### `modules/wrappers`

Configures [nix-wrapper-modules](https://github.com/BirdeeHub/nix-wrapper-modules), which are used to wrap executables with extra configuration.
These are not aspects, and instead land into `inputs.self.wrappers`, where they can be consumed by (typically feature) aspects:

```nix
imports = [ inputs.self.wrappers.kubectl.install ];
wrappers.kubectl.enable = true;
```

The wrapped packages also end up in the flake outputs, as `.#packages.<wrapper>` and `.#wrappers.<wrapper>`.

</details>

<details>
<summary>bin/</summary>

### `bin/`

Miscellaneous shell scripts, in the future these will probably become feature aspects and live directly inside nix code.
Currently they are symlinked to `~/.bin` and added to `PATH` from [aspects.scripts](./modules/features/scripts.nix)

</details>

<details>
<summary>config/</summary>

### `config/`

Plain configs for different applications, these are always symlinked using `config.lib.file.mkOutOfStoreSymlink` into the home directory, typically under `~/.config`.

In the future, these will likely become nix-wrapper-modules instead.

</details>

<details>
<summary>secrets/</summary>

### `secrets/`

[Sops](https://github.com/getsops/sops) secret definitions. Contains the actual secrets, encrypted via an age key.
The age key for the yaml files is stored in the repo as well, encrypted of course. This can only be decrypted with a PGP key.

</details>
